---
title: "Cleaning Your Silver"
author: Daryl
date: Jan 15, 2003
geometry: "left=3cm,right=3cm,top=2cm,bottom=2cm"
---

# Cleaning Your Silver

Have you ever polished your valuable silver to get rid of that ugly
tarnish? Me, too. However, I just learned from a retired Chem Teacher
buddy of mine, [[John
Gilligan]{.underline}](mailto:jgilligan@wjtech.net), now a
teacher-oriented website designer, expert and all-round good guy, that I
was removing lots and lots of silver with the cleaning! Wow, and I
thought I was doing myself a favour! Here\'s the poop. Silver tarnishes
when sulphur attaches to the silver creating silver sulphate, an
unseemly greyish thing that my In-Laws swear is my fault.

Chemical applications and any abrasive cleanser/polish will actually
remove the entire structure of silver sulphate from the surface, sulphur
AND SILVER. Ahh! Along with the silver sulphate, there goes some of the
valuable silver, huh? This is especially bad when you are dealing with
cheaper silver plated things. The plating may only be a few atoms thick.
One good scrubbing can remove most or ALL the silver. So, to alleviate
this problem, you must use a method that will remove the sulphur and
leave the silver intact. A basic electrolysis lab takes care of this.
You will need a sheet of real aluminium foil, hot water, baking soda,
table salt and a pan to do this in.

+ Line your pan with a sheet of Al foil. Place the item to be
cleaned, say the crown jewels, on top of the Al foil sheet. Contact is a
MUST.

+ On a stove, heat some water. Enough water to cover the items in
the pan to be cleaned. Add some table salt like you are boiling water
for spaghetti.

+ Into this hot water, dissolve a cup or two of fresh baking soda.

+ Once dissolved and quite hot, pour this over the item -- making
sure contact is maintained between the item and the Al foil.

+ Sit back and watch the tarnish disappear, leaving all the silver
behind where your hard-earned money says it should be.

***Why do this happen, you ask?*** The absolute best chemical
description of this is by the famed [[Bassam Z.
Shakhashiri]{.underline}](http://scifun.chem.wisc.edu/BZS_bio/biosketch.html),
one of the most famous chem educators of all time. It\'s worth a trip to
his site to check out what\'s hot in Chem Demos. To paraphrase Dr.
Shakhashiri;\
The baking soda/aluminium combo pulls sulphur off the silver by a small
electrolytic current set up through the \"salt bridge\". This is why
contact with the aluminium is so important. Both Silver and Aluminium
loves to accept sulphur, but aluminium does it quicker and will pull
atoms of it off the item as long as the electrolytic current remains.
The silver is left all alone again. The heat of the water is just a
catalyst and makes the reaction occur faster. I\'ve done this recently
and was amazed at the results. One of my silver forks actually looks
silver again! (I leave the rest of the service for eight to my wife to
clean.)

Now, for **Dr. Shakhashiri\'s** own explanation taken from [[Chem Dept
Univ Wisconsin]{.underline}](http://scifun.chem.wisc.edu/) at [[Tarnish
Experiment]{.underline}](http://scifun.chem.wisc.edu/HomeExpts/TARNISH.html).\
*When silver tarnishes, it combines with sulphur and forms silver
sulphide. Silver sulphide is black. When a thin coating of silver
sulphide forms on the surface of silver, it darkens the silver. The
silver can be returned to its former lustre by removing the silver
sulphide coating from the surface. There are two ways to remove the
coating of silver sulphide. One way is to remove the silver sulphide
from the surface. The other is to reverse the chemical reaction and turn
silver sulphide back into silver. In the first method, some silver is
removed in the process of polishing. In the second, the silver remains
in place. Polishes that contain an abrasive shine the silver by rubbing
off the silver sulphide and some of the silver along with it. Another
kind of tarnish remover dissolves the silver sulphide in a liquid. These
polishes are used by dipping the silver into the liquid, or by rubbing
the liquid on with a cloth and washing it off. These polishes also
remove some of the silver. The tarnish-removal method used in this
experiment uses a chemical reaction to convert the silver sulphide back
into silver. This does not remove any of the silver. Many metals in
addition to silver form compounds with sulphur. Some of them have a
greater affinity for sulphur than silver does. Aluminium is such a
metal. In this experiment, the silver sulphide reacts with aluminium. In
the reaction, sulphur atoms are transferred from silver to aluminium,
freeing the silver metal and forming aluminium sulphide. Chemists
represent this reaction with a chemical equation.*

>>>>> 3 Ag~2~S + 2 Al -\> 6 Ag + Al~2~S~3~

silver sulphide and aluminium \"gives you\" silver and aluminium
sulphide.

*The reaction between silver sulphide and aluminium takes place when the
two are in contact while they are immersed in a baking soda solution.
The reaction is faster when the solution is warm. The solution carries
the sulphur from the silver to the aluminium. The aluminium sulphide may
adhere to the aluminium foil, or it may form tiny, pale yellow flakes in
the bottom of the pan. The silver and aluminium must be in contact with
each other, because a small electric current flows between them during
the reaction. This type of reaction, which involves an electric current,
is called an electrochemical reaction. Reactions of this type are used
in batteries to produce electricity.*

**Addendum 01/15/03 : I\'ve been asked a few times recently if this is
actually silver being cleaned or aluminium replacing the sulphides and
coating the silver to look cleaner. Hmm. So, I went a searching for my
old notes. Alas, they are missing along with Jimmy Hoffa.\
I saw this many moons ago at a ChemDen thing at a national NSTA
convention. It\'s been confirmed by Chem folks I know. Here is the text
from an expert:**

*I don\'t see any mystery here. The hydrogen gas is merely evolved
through the reaction of aluminium and sodium carbonate. The hydrogen
plays no part in the removal of the silver tarnish (i.e., silver(I)
sulphide). Aluminium is a reducing agent, and thereby reduces silver
sulphide to elemental silver while forming aluminium sulphide (which is
yellow in colour). The aluminium sulphide thus formed readily hydrolyses
to form aluminium hydroxide and hydrogen sulphide. So, we really have
\*two\* gasses evolved: hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide, with the
quantity of the former being greater than the latter. Aluminium in pure
water would not work since the surface film of aluminium hydroxide
readily stops further activity. Since hydroxyl ions from the sodium
carbonate readily dissolve any aluminium hydroxide thus formed, a ready
supply of aluminium ions for reduction purposes is assured. I have used
this process, and found that cold water will work, but lukewarm is
better. Boiling water will probably work even better, but the aluminium
is used up too fast, and the smell is quite bad (probably from H2S or
similar). See, I told you there was hydrogen sulphide! :-) Now you know
why. I also find that a scum forms on the surface of the water after
some time. Probably aluminium hydroxide, formed due to the reverse
reaction with evolved hydrogen sulphide. **\
Larry Lippman @ Recognition Research Corp.\
***

***So, now you know the rest of the story\...***

Darylscience.com
